The gaudy, blabbingand remorseful day
Is crept into the bosomof the sea;
And now loud-howlingwolves arouse the jades
That drag the tragicmelancholy night;
Who, with their drowsy,slow and flagging wings,
Clip dead men's graves andfrom their misty jaws
Breathe foul contagiousdarkness in the air.
Therefore bring forth thesoldiers of our prize;
For, whilst our pinnaceanchors in the Downs,
Here shall they make theirransom on the sand,
Or with their blood stainthis discolour'd shore.
Master, this prisonerfreely give I thee;
And thou that art hismate, make boot of this;
The other, WalterWhitmore, is thy share.
What is my ransom, master?Let me know.
A thousand crowns, or elselay down your head.
(Master's-Mate)And so much shallyou give, or off goes yours.
What, think you much topay two thousand crowns,
And bear the name and portof gentlemen?
Cut both the villains'throats; for die you shall:
The lives of those whichwe have lost in fight
Be counterpoised with sucha petty sum!
I'll give it, sir; andtherefore spare my life.
And so will I and writehome for it straight.
I lost mine eye in layingthe prize aboard,
And therefore to revengeit, shalt thou die;
And so should these, if Imight have my will.
Be not so rash; takeransom, let him live.
Look on my George; I am agentleman:
Rate me at what thou wilt,thou shalt be paid.
And so am I; my name isWalter Whitmore.
How now! why start'st thou?what, doth death affright?
Thy name affrights me, inwhose sound is death.
A cunning man didcalculate my birth
And told me that by waterI should die:
Yet let not this make theebe bloody-minded;
Never yet did basedishonour blur our name,
But with our sword wewiped away the blot;
Therefore, when merchant-likeI sell revenge,
Broke be my sword, my armstorn and defaced,
And I proclaim'd a cowardthrough the world!
Stay, Whitmore; for thyprisoner is a prince,
The Duke of Suffolk,William de la Pole.
The Duke of Suffolkmuffled up in rags!
Ay, but these rags are nopart of the duke:
Jove sometimes wentdisguised, and why not I?
But Jove was never slain,as thou shalt be.
Obscure and lowly swain,King Henry's blood,
The honourable blood ofLancaster,
Must not be shed by such ajaded groom.
Hast thou not kiss'd thyhand and held my stirrup?
Bare-headed plodded by myfoot-cloth mule
And thought thee happywhen I shook my head?
How often hast thou waitedat my cup,
Fed from my trencher,kneel'd down at the board.
When I have feasted withQueen Margaret?
Remember it and let itmake thee crest-fall'n,
Ay, and allay this thyabortive pride;
Speak, captain, shall Istab the forlorn swain?
First let my words stabhim, as he hath me.
Base slave, thy words areblunt and so art thou.
Convey him hence and onour longboat's side
Strike off his head.
Thou darest not, for thyown.
Pole!
Ay, kennel, puddle, sink;
whose filth Troubles the silverspring where England drinks.
Now will I dam up this thyyawning mouth
For swallowing thetreasure of the realm:
Thy lips that kiss'd thequeen shall sweep the ground;
And thou that smiledst atgood Duke Humphrey's death,
Against the senselesswinds shalt grin in vain,
Who in contempt shall hissat thee again:
And wedded be thou to thehags of hell,
For daring to affy amighty lord
Unto the daughter of aworthless king,
By thee Anjou and Mainewere sold to France,
The false revoltingNormans thorough thee
Disdain to call us lord,and Picardy
Hath slain their governors,surprised our forts,
And sent the raggedwounded soldiers home.
The princely Warwick, andthe Nevils all,
Whose dreadful swords werenever drawn in vain,
As hating thee, are risingup in arms:
And now the house of York,thrust from the crown
By shameful murder of aguiltless king
Burns with revenging fire;
The commons here in Kentare up in arms:
And, to conclude, reproachand beggary
Is crept into the palaceof our king.
And all by thee. Away!convey him hence.
O that I were a god, toshoot forth thunder
Upon these paltry,servile, abject drudges!
It is impossible that Ishould die
By such a lowly vassal asthyself.
Thy words move rage andnot remorse in me:
Ay but thy deeds shall stay thyfury soon
I go of message from thequeen to France;
I charge thee waft mesafely cross the Channel.
Come, Suffolk, I must waftthee to thy death.
'tis thee I fear.
Thou shalt have cause tofear before I leave thee.
What, are ye daunted now?now will ye stoop?
My gracious lord, entreathim, speak him fair.
Suffolk's imperial tongueis stern and rough,
Used to command, untaughtto plead for favour.
Far be it we should honoursuch as these
With humble suit: no,rather let my head
Stoop to the block thanthese knees bow to any
Save to the God ofheaven and to my king;
And sooner dance upon abloody pole
Than stand uncover'd tothe vulgar groom.
True nobility is exemptfrom fear:
More can I bear than youdare execute.
Hale him away, and let himtalk no more.
Come, soldiers, show whatcruelty ye can,
That this my death maynever be forgot!
Great men oft die by vilebezonians:
A Roman sworder andbanditto slave
Murder'd sweet Tully;Brutus' bastard hand
Stabb'd Julius Caesar;savage islanders
Pompey the Great; andSuffolk...(sound of beheading)
...dies by pirates.
And as for those whoseransom we have set,
It is our pleasure one ofthem depart;
So come you with usand let him go.
There let his head andlifeless body lie,
Until the queen hismistress bury it.
O barbarous and bloodyspectacle!
His body will I bear untothe king:
If he revenge it not, yetwill his friends;
So will the queen, thatliving held him dear.
Come, and get thee a sword,though made of a lath;
they have been up thesetwo days.
They have the more need tosleep now, then.
I tell thee, Jack Cade theclothier means to dress
the commonwealth, and turn it,and set a new nap upon it.
So he had need, for'tis threadbare.
Well, I say it was nevermerry world in England
since gentlemen came up.
O miserable age! virtue is notregarded in handicrafts-men.
The nobility think scornto go in leather aprons.
Nay, more, the king'scouncil are no good workmen.
True; and yet it is said,labour in thy vocation;
which is as much to say as,
let the magistratesbe labouring men;
and therefore shouldwe be magistrates.
Thou hast hit it; forthere's no better sign of a
brave mind than a hardhand.
I see them! I see them!
There's Best's son,tanner of Wingham,--
He shall have theskin of our enemies,
to make dog's-leather of.
And Dick the Butcher,--
Then is sin struckdown like an ox,
and iniquity's throatcut like a calf.
And Smith the weaver,--
Argo, their thread of lifeis spun.
Come, come, let's fall inwith them.
(men chanting) John Cade!!
We John Cade, so termed ofour supposed father,--
Or rather, of stealing acade of herrings.
For our enemies shall fallbefore us, inspired with
the spirit of putting downkings and princes,
--Command silence.
Silence!
My father was aMortimer,--
He was an honest man,and a good bricklayer.
My mother a Plantagenet,--
I knew her well; she wasa midwife.
My wife descended of theLacies,--
She was, indeed, apedler's daughter,
and sold many laces.
Therefore am I of anhonourable house.
Ay, by my faith, thefield is honourable;
and there was he borne,under hedge,
Valiant I am.
A' must needs; forbeggary is valiant.
I am able to endure much.
O no doubt of that; forI have seen him
whipped three market-daystogether.
Be valiant, then; foryour captain is valiant,
and vows reformation.
There shall be in England
seven, eight me loavessold for a penny:
the three-hooped potshall have ten hoops
and I will make it felonyto drink small beer:
all the realm shallbe in common;
and in Cheapside shallmy palfrey go to grass:
and when I am king,as king I will be,--
(crowd chants) God save yourmajesty!
I thank you, good people:there shall be no money;
all shall eat anddrink on my score;
and I will apparel them all inone livery, that they may agree
like brothers andworship me their lord.
The first thing we do is, killall the lawyers.
(crowd) Ay.
Nay, that I mean to do. Isnot this a lamentable thing,
that of the skin of an innocentlamb should be made parchment?
that parchment, beingscribbled o'er,
should undo a man? Somesay the bee stings:
I say, 'tis the bee'swax; for I did but once
seal to a thing, and I wasnever mine own man since.
How now! who's there?
The clerk of Chatham:he can write and read
and cast accompt.
O monstrous!
We took him setting ofboys' copies.
I am sorry for't: the man is aproper man, of mine honour;
unless I find him guilty,he shall not die.
Come hither, sirrah,I must examine thee:
what is thy name?
Emmanuel.
Thus thow use to write thy name,
Alas thou a mark to thyself likean honest plain dealing man
Sir, I thank God, I havebeen so well brought up
that I can write my name.
(crowd) He hath confessed:
Away with him, I say!hang him with his pen
and ink-horn about his neck.
Where's our general?
Here I am, thou particularfellow.
Fly, fly, fly! Sir HumphreyStafford
and his brother are hard by,with the king's forces.
♪drums of approaching army in background
Stand, villain, stand,or I'll fell thee down.
He shall be encountered witha man as good as himself:
he is but a knight, is a'?
No.
To equal him, I will makemyself a knight presently.
Rise up Sir John Mortimer.
Now have at him!
♪ Horns and drums play
Rebellious hinds, thefilth and scum of Kent,
Mark'd for the gallows,lay your weapons down;
Home to your cottages,forsake this groom:
The king is merciful, ifyou repent.
But angry, wrathful, andinclined to blood,
If you go forward;therefore yield, or die.
As for these silken-coatedslaves, I care not:
It is to you, good people,that I speak,
Over whom, in time tocome, I hope to rule;
For I am rightful heirunto the crown.
Villain, thy father was aplasterer;
And thou thyself ashearman, art thou not?
And Adam was a gardener.
And what of that?
Marry, this: EdmundMortimer, Earl of March.
Married the Duke of Clarence'daughter, did he not?
Ay, sir.
By her he had two childrenat one birth.
That's false.
Ay, there's the question;but I say, 'tis true:
The elder of them, beingput to nurse,
Was by a beggar-womanstolen away;
And, ignorant of his birthand parentage,
Became a bricklayer whenhe came to age:
His son am I; deny it, ifyou can.
Nay, 'tis too true;therefore he shall be king.
Sir, he made a chimneyin my father's house,
and the bricks are alive atthis day to testify it;
therefore deny it not.
And will you credit thisbase drudge's words,
That speaks he knows notwhat?
(crowd) Ay, marry, will we;therefore get ye gone.
Jack Cade, the Duke ofYork hath taught you this.
He lies, for I inventedit myself.
Go to then, tell the kingfrom me, that, for his
father's sake, Henry the Fifth,
I am content he shall reign;
but I'll be protector over him.
And furthermore, wellhave the Lord Say's head
for selling thedukedom of Maine.
And good reason; forthereby is England mained,
and fain to go with a staff, butthat my puissance holds it up.
Fellow kings, I tellyou that that Lord Say
hath gelded the commonwealth,and made it an eunuch:
and more than that,he can speak French;
and therefore he is a traitor.
O gross and miserableignorance!
Nay, answer, if you can:the Frenchmen are our
enemies; go to, then,I ask but this:
can he that speaks withthe tongue of an enemy
be a good counsellor, or no?
(crowd) No, no; and thereforewe'll have his head.
Well, seeing gentle wordswill not prevail,
Assail them with the armyof the king.
Herald, away; andthroughout every town
Proclaim them traitorsthat are up with Cade;
That those which flybefore the battle ends
May, even in their wives'and children's sight,
Be hang'd up for exampleat their doors:
And you that be the king'sfriends, follow me.
And you that love thecommons, follow me.
Now show yourselves men;'tis for liberty.
We will not spare onelord, one gentleman:
Spare none but such as goin clouted shoon;
For they are thriftyhonest men,
and such as would, but thatthey dare not, take our parts.
They are all in order andmarch toward us.
But then are we in order whenwe are most out of order.
Come, march forward.
(crowd chants a battle cry)Cade! Cade! Cade!
Where's Dick, the butcherof Ashford?
Here, sir.
They fell before theelike sheep and oxen,
and thou behavedst thyself
as if thou hadst been inthine own slaughter-house:
therefore thus willI reward thee,
the Lent shall be aslong again as it is;
Eh?
thou shalt have a licence tokill for a hundred lacking one.
I desire no more.
And, to speak truth,thou deservest no less.
This monument of thevictory will I bear;
and the bodies will bedragged at my heels
till I do come to London,where we will have the
mayor's sword borne beforeus.
If we mean to thriveand do good,
break open the gaols andlet out the prisoners.
Fear not that, I warrant thee.
Come, let's marchtowards London.
(crowd chants) John Cade! JohnCade!
Oft have I heard thatgrief softens the mind,
And makes it fearful anddegenerate;
Think therefore on revengeand cease to weep.
But who can cease to weepand look on this?
Here may his head lie onmy throbbing breast:
But where's the body thatI should embrace?
What answer makes your graceto the rebels' supplication?
I'll send some holy bishopto entreat;
For God forbid so manysimple souls
Should perish by thesword! And I myself,
Rather than bloody warshall cut them short,
Will parley with Jack Cadetheir general:
But stay, I'll read itover once again.
Ah, barbarous villains!hath this lovely face
Ruled, like a wanderingplanet, over me,
And could it not enforcethem to relent,
That were unworthy tobehold the same?
Lord Say, Jack Cade hathsworn to have thy head.
Ay, but I hope yourhighness shall have his.
How, madam!
Still lamenting Suffolk's death?
I fear me, love, if that Ihad been dead,
Thou wouldst not havemourn'd so much for me.
No, my love, I should notmourn, but die for thee.
How now! what news? whycomest thou in such haste?
The rebels are inSouthwark; fly, my lord!
Jack Cade proclaimshimself Lord Mortimer,
Descended from the Duke ofClarence' house,
And calls your graceusurper openly
And vows to crown himselfin Westminster.
His army is a raggedmultitude
Of hinds and peasants,rude and merciless:
Sir Humphrey Stafford andh is brother's death
Hath given them heart andcourage to proceed:
All scholars, lawyers,courtiers, gentlemen,
They call false caterpillars,and intend their death.
O graceless men! they knownot what they do.
My gracious lord, returnto Killingworth,
Until a power be raised toput them down.
Ah, were the Duke ofSuffolk now alive,
These Kentish rebels wouldbe soon appeased!
Lord Say, the traitorshate thee;
Therefore away with us toKillingworth.
So might your grace'sperson be in danger.
The sight of me is odiousin their eyes;
And therefore in this citywill I stay
And live alone as secretas I may.
Jack Cade hath gottenLondon bridge:
The citizens fly andforsake their houses:
The rascal people,thirsting after prey,
Join with the traitor, andthey jointly swear
To spoil the city and yourroyal court.
Then linger not, my lord,away, take horse.
Come, Margaret; God, ourhope, will succor us.
My hope is gone, nowSuffolk is deceased.
Farewell, my lord: trustnot the Kentish rebels.
Trust nobody, for fear yoube betray'd.
The trust I have is inmine innocence,
And therefore am I boldand resolute.
Jack Cade!
Now is Mortimer lord ofLondon.
I charge and command that,at the city's cost,
the pissing-conduitrun nothing but
claret wine this firstyear of our reign.
And henceforward itshall be treason
for any that calls meother than Lord Mortimer.
Jack Cade! Jack Cade!
Knock him down there.
If this fellow be wise, he'llnever call ye Jack Cade more:
I think he hath a veryfair warning. My lord,
there's an army gatheredtogether in Smithfield.
Come, then, let's go fightwith them; but first, go
and set London bridge onfire; and, if you can,
burn down the Towertoo. Come, let's away.
So, sirs: now go some andpull down the Savoy;
others to the inns ofcourt; down with them all.
I have a suit unto yourlordship.
Be it a lordship, thou shalthave it for that word.
Only that the laws of Englandmay come out of your mouth.
Mass, 'twill be sore law, then;
for he was thrust in themouth with a spear,
and 'tis not whole yet.
Nay, John, it willbe stinking law
for his breath stinks witheating toasted cheese.
I have thought uponit, it shall be so.
Away, burn all therecords of the realm:
my mouth shall be theparliament of England.
Then we are like to havebiting statutes,
unless his teeth be pulledout.
And henceforward allthings shall be in common.
My lord, a prize, a prize!here's the Lord Say,
which sold the towns inFrance; he that made us pay
one and twenty fifteens, andone shilling to the pound,
the last subsidy.
Well, he shall be beheadedfor it ten times.
thou say, thou serge,nay, thou buckram lord!
now art thou within point-blankof our jurisdiction regal.
What canst thouanswer to my majesty
for giving up of Normandy untoMounsieur kiss my backside,
the dauphin of France?
Be it known unto theeby these presence,
even the presence of LordMortimer, that I am the besom
that must sweep the court clean
of such filth as thou art.Thou hast most traitorously
corrupted the youth of the realmin erecting a grammar school;
and whereas, before,our forefathers
had no other books butthe score and the tally,
thou hast causedprinting to be used,
and contrary to the king,his crown and dignity,
thou hast built a paper-mill.
It will be proved to thy facethat thou hast men about thee
that usually speak ofa noun and a verb,
and such abominable words
as no Christian earcan endure to hear.
Thou hast appointedjustices of peace,
to call poor men before them
about matters they werenot able to answer.
Moreover, thou hast putthem in prison; and because
they could not read,thou hast hanged them;
when, indeed, onlyfor that cause
they have been mostworthy to live.
Thou dost ride in afoot-cloth, dost thou not?
What of that?
Marry, thou oughtest not tolet thy horse wear a cloak,
when honester men than thou goin their hose and doublets.
And work in their shirt; asmyself, for example,
that am a butcher.
You men of Kent,--
What say you of Kent?
Nothing but this; 'tis'bona terra, mala gens.'
Away with him, away withhim! he speaks Latin.
Hear me but speak, andbear me where you will.
Kent, in the CommentariesCaesar writ,
Is term'd the civil'stplace of all this isle:
Sweet is the country,because full of riches;
The people liberal,valiant, active, wealthy;
Which makes me hope youare not void of pity.
I sold not Maine, I lostnot Normandy,
Yet, to recover them,would lose my life.
Justice with favour have Ialways done;
Prayers and tears have movedme, gifts could never.
When have I aught exactedat your hands,
But to maintain the king,the realm and you?
Large gifts have I bestow'don learned clerks,
Because my book preferr'dme to the king,
And seeing ignorance isthe curse of God,
Knowledge the wingwherewith we fly to heaven,
Unless you be possess'dwith devilish spirits,
You cannot but forbear tomurder me:
This tongue hath parley'dunto foreign kings
For your behoof,--
Tut, when struck'st thouone blow in the field?
Great men have reachinghands: oft have I struck
Those that I never saw andstruck them dead.
O monstrous coward! what,to come behind folks?
These cheeks are pale forwatching for your good.
Give him a box o' the ear andthat will make 'em red again.
Long sitting to determinepoor men's causes
Hath made me full ofsickness and diseases.
Why dost thou quiver, man?
The palsy, and not fear,provokes me.
Nay, he nods at us,as who should say,
I'll be even with them:
I'll see if his headwill stand steadier
on a pole, or no. Take himaway, and behead him.
Tell me wherein have Ioffended most?
Have I affected wealth orhonour? speak.
Are my chests fill'd upwith extorted gold?
Is my apparel sumptuous tobehold?
Whom have I injured, thatye seek my death?
These hands are free fromguiltless bloodshedding,
This breast from harbouringfoul deceitful thoughts.
O, let me live!
I feel remorse in myselfwith his words;
but I'll bridle it: heshall die, an it be
but for pleading so well forhis life. Away with him!
he has a familiarunder his tongue;
he speaks not o' God's name.
Go, take him away,I say, and strike
off his head presently;and then break into his
son-in-law's house,Sir James Cromer,
and strike off his head,
and bring them bothupon two poles hither.
It shall be done.
Ah, countrymen! if whenyou make your prayers,
God should be so obdurateas yourselves,
How would it fare withyour departed souls?
And therefore yet relent,and save my life.
Away with him! and do as Icommand ye.
The proudest peer in therealm shall not wear
a head on his shoulders,unless he pay me tribute;
there shall not amaid be married,
but she shall pay to me
her maidenhead ere theyhave it: men shall hold of
me in capite; and we chargeand command that their
wives shall be as free as heartcan wish or tongue can tell.
My lord, when shallwe go to Cheapside
to take up commoditiesupon our bills?
Marry, presently.
O, brave!
But is not this braver?Let them kiss one another,
for they loved wellwhen they were alive.
Now part them again, lest theyconsult about the giving up of
some more towns in France.Soldiers, defer the spoil
of the city until night: forwith these borne before us,
instead of maces,will we ride through
the streets, and at everycorner have them kiss. Away!
Up Fish Street! down SaintMagnus' Corner! Kill
and knock down! throw theminto Thames!
(trumpets)
What noise is this I hear?Dare any be so bold
to sound retreat or parley,when I command them kill?
Ay, here they be that dareand will disturb thee:
Know, Cade, we comeambassadors from the king
Unto the commons whom thouhast misled;
And here pronounce freepardon to them all
That will forsake thee andgo home in peace.
What say ye, countrymen?will ye relent,
And yield to mercy whilst'tis offer'd you;
Or let a rebel lead you toyour deaths?
Who loves the king andwill embrace his pardon,
Fling up his cap, and say'God save his majesty!'
Who hateth him and honoursnot his father,
Henry the Fifth, that madeall France to quake,
Shake he his weapon at usand pass by.
God save the king! Godsave the king!
What, Buckingham andClifford, are ye so brave?
And you, base peasants,do ye believe him?
will you needs be hanged withyour pardons about your necks?
Hath my sword thereforebroke through London gates,
that you should leave meat the White Hart in
Southwark? I thought yewould never have given out
these arms till you hadrecovered your ancient
freedom: but you are allrecreants and dastards,
and delight to live inslavery to the nobility.
Let them break your backswith burthens, take your
houses over your heads,ravish your wives
and daughters beforeyour faces: as for me,
I will make shift for one;
and so, God's curselight upon you all!
We'll follow Cade, we'llfollow Cade!
Is Cade the son of Henrythe Fifth,
That thus you do exclaimyou'll go with him?
Will he conduct you throughthe heart of France,
And make the meanest ofyou earls and dukes?
Were't not a shame, thatwhilst you live at jar,
The fearful French, whomyou late vanquished,
Should make a start o'erseas and vanquish you?
Methinks already in thiscivil broil
I see them lording it inLondon streets,
Crying 'Villiago!' untoall they meet.
Better ten thousandbase-born Cades miscarry
Than you should stoop untoa Frenchman's mercy.
To France, to France, andget what you have lost;
Spare England, for it isyour native coast;
Henry hath money, you arestrong and manly;
God on our side, doubt notof victory.
A Clifford! a Clifford! we'llfollow the king and Clifford.
Was ever feather solightly blown to and fro
as this multitude? The name ofHenry the Fifth hales them
to an hundred mischiefs, andmakes them leave me desolate.
I see them lay their headstogether to surprise me.
My sword make way for me,for here is no staying.
In despite of thedevils and hell,
have through the verymiddest of you?
What, is he fled? Go some,and follow him;
And he that brings hishead unto the king
Shall have a thousandcrowns for his reward.
Follow me, soldiers: we'lldevise a mean
To reconcile you all untothe king.
Was ever king that joy'dan earthly throne,
And could command no morecontent than I?
No sooner was I crept outof my cradle
But I was made a king, atnine months old.
Was never subject long'dto be a king
As I do long and wish tobe a subject.
Health and glad tidings toyour majesty!
Why, Buckingham, is thetraitor Cade surprised?
Or is he but retired tomake him strong?
He is fled, my lord, andall his powers do yield;
And humbly thus, withhalters on their necks,
Expect your highness' doomof life or death.
Then, heaven, set ope thyeverlasting gates,
To entertain my vows ofthanks and praise!
Soldiers, this day haveyou redeemed your lives,
And show'd how well you loveyour prince and country:
Continue still in this sogood a mind,
And Henry, though he beinfortunate,
Assure yourselves, willnever be unkind:
And so, with thanks andpardon to you all,
I do dismiss you to yourseveral countries.
God save the king! Godsave the king!
Please it your grace to beadvertised
The Duke of York is newlycome from Ireland,
And with a puissant and amighty force
Of gallowglasses and stoutkerns
Is marching hitherward inproud array,
And still proclaimeth, ashe comes along,
His arms are only toremove from thee
The Duke of Somerset, whomhe terms a traitor.
Thus stands my state, 'twixtCade and York distress'd.
Like to a ship that,having 'scaped a tempest,
Is straightway calm'd andboarded with a pirate:
But now is Cade drivenback, his men dispersed;
And now is York in arms tosecond him.
I pray thee, Buckingham,go and meet him,
And ask him what's thereason of these arms.
Tell him I'll send DukeEdmund to the Tower;
And, Somerset, we'llcommit thee thither,
Until his army bedismiss'd from him.
I will yield my lord toprison willingly,
Or unto death, to do mycountry good.
In any case, be not toorough in terms;
For he is fierce and cannotbrook hard language.
I will, my lord; and doubtnot so to deal
As all things shallredound unto your good.
Come, wife, let's in, andlearn to govern better;
For yet may England cursemy wretched reign.
Fie on ambition! fie onmyself, that have a sword,
and yet am ready to famish!These five days have I hid me
in these woods anddurst not peep out,
for all the country islaid for me; but now
am I so hungry that if I mighthave a lease of my life
for a thousand years Icould stay no longer.
Wherefore, on a brick wall haveI climbed into this garden,
to see if I can eat grass, orpick a sallet another while,
which is not amiss tocool a man's stomach
this hot weather. And Ithink this word 'sallet'
was born to do me good:for many a time, but for a
sallet, my brainpan had beencleft with a brown bill;
and many a time, whenI have been dry and
bravely marching, it hathserved me instead of a
quart pot to drink in; andnow the word 'sallet'
must serve me to feed on.
Lord, who would liveturmoiled in the court,
And may enjoy such quietwalks as these?
This small inheritance myfather left me
Contenteth me, and worth amonarchy.
I seek not to wax great byothers' waning,
Or gather wealth, I carenot, with what envy:
Sufficeth that I havemaintains my state
And sends the poor wellpleased from my gate.
Here's the lord of the soilcome to seize me for a stray,
for entering hisfee-simple without leave.
Ah, villain, thou wilt betrayme, and get a thousand
crowns of the kingcarrying my head to him:
but I'll make thee eat ironlike an ostrich, and swallow
my sword like a great pin,ere thou and I part.
Why, rude companion,whatsoe'er thou be,
I know thee not; why, then,should I betray thee?
Is't not enough to breakinto my garden,
And, like a thief, to cometo rob my grounds,
Climbing my walls in spiteof me the owner,
But thou wilt brave mewith these saucy terms?
Brave thee! ay, by the bestblood that ever was broached,
and beard thee too.Look on me well:
I have eat no meat thesefive days; yet, come thou
and thy five men, and ifI do not leave you all
as dead as a doornails, I prayGod I may never eat grass more.
Nay, it shall ne'er besaid, while England stands,
That Alexander Iden, anesquire of Kent,
Took odds to combat a poorfamish'd man.
Oppose thy steadfast-gazingeyes to mine,
See if thou canst outfaceme with thy looks:
Set limb to limb, and thouart far the lesser;
Thy hand is but a fingerto my fist,
Thy leg a stick comparedwith this truncheon;
My foot shall fight withall the strength thou hast;
And if mine arm be heavedin the air,
Thy grave is digg'dalready in the earth.
As for words, whosegreatness answers words,
Let this my sword reportwhat speech forbears.
By my valour, the mostcomplete champion that ever I
heard! Steel, if thou turnthe edge, or cut not out
this burly-boned clownin chines of beef
ere thou sleep in thy sheath,
I beseech God on my knees thou
mayst be turned tohobnails.
O, I am slain!
famine and no otherhath slain me:
let ten thousand devils comeagainst me, and give me
but the ten meals I have lost,and I'll defy them all.
Wither, garden;and be henceforth
a burying-place to all thatdo dwell in this house,
because the unconqueredsoul of Cade is fled.
Is't Cade that I have slain,that monstrous traitor?
Iden, farewell, and beproud of thy victory. Tell
Kent from me, she hath losther best man, and exhort
all the world to be cowards;for I, that never feared any,
am vanquished byfamine, not by valour.
How much thou wrong'st me,heaven be my judge.
Die, damned wretch, thecurse of her that bare thee;
And as I thrust thy bodyin with my sword,
So wish I, I might thrustthy soul to hell.
Hence will I drag theeheadlong by the heels
Unto a dunghill whichshall be thy grave,
And there cut off thy mostungracious head;
Which I will bear intriumph to the king,
Leaving thy trunk forcrows to feed upon.